Update api.md (#247)
timescale/docs.timescale.com-content: using-timescaledb/compression.md

|2|8/22/2019 2:05|301.0|

Notice that now, your float list of [88.2, 88.6, 90.0, 300.5, 302.0, 301.0] will 
compress much better than before, since you’ve ordered your values in a way that 
groups them closer together by magnitude. You should use this methodology to choose 
the column list you pass to timescaledb.compress_orderby. 

In this case, your statement for turning on compression for this hypertable would 
look like this:

``` sql
ALTER TABLE metrics SET (timescaledb.compress, "timescaledb.compress_orderby = 'device_id, time');
```

Segment By

As discussed earlier, timescaledb.compress_orderby defines how your compressed data 
is ordered. When only compress_orderby is specified, all columns are compressed into 
arrays that contain a maximum of 1000 values. So, in the example where we order by 
`device_id, time`, the table would now become three columns that get compressed, 
as shown below:

|device_id|time|value|
|---|---|---|
|1|8/22/2019 0:00|88.2|
|1|8/22/2019 1:00|88.6|
|1|8/22/2019 2:00|90.0|
|2|8/22/2019 0:05|300.5|
|2|8/22/2019 1:05|302.0|
|2|8/22/2019 2:05|301.0|

However, what happens when you want to query by device_id? You’ll end up having 

> to decompress the above chunk in order to find values associated with device_id = 2, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to decompress the compressed array in order to find values associated with device_id = 2, 
```

and that you have issued the commands to ensure that TimescaleDB understands how 
to organize your data. This command simply automates the process of compressing 
those chunks that cross the 60 day age threshold.

To confirm that your policy job has been created, you can validate it by using 
the following command:

``` sql
select * from _timescaledb_config.bgw_job where job_type like 'compress%';
```

Notice the system will look for chunks that cross the 60 day threshold every 15 
minutes and if the job for some reason fails it will be put in the retry queue 
and be retried in an hour.
---

### Decompressing Chunks [](decompress)

Next we want to walk through what needs to happen in the event that you need to 
backfill or update data that lives in a compressed chunk. 

TimescaleDB does not support inserts orupdates into a compressed chunk. To insert 
or update data, we must first decompress the target chunks. But before we can do 
that, we need to turn off our compression policy, otherwisethat policy will attempt 
to re-compress the chunks that we are currently working on (not the desired result). 
To accomplish this we will issue the following command:

``` sql

> select remove_compress_chunks_policy('conditions');

Reviewer: note we probably should be using alter_job_policy(job_id, next_run=>'infinity'); instead. But, maybe better left till later

Author: agreed!!!

In the long term this is one part of how you want to think about your compression 
policy strategy (i.e. at what point will you start to use deep and narrow queries) 
along with things like frequency of access and disk savings to decide when to start 
compressing data.

>:WARNING: The current release of TimescaleDB supports the ability to query data in 
compressed chunks, however, it does not support inserts, or updates into compressed 
chunks.   

Given the nature of time series data, out of order data would be one of the use 
cases where you would need to add data to, or update data in, an already compressed 
chunk. In this scenario, you will be required to pause your compression policy, 
decompress the chunks where the data would need to be inserted or updated, add or 
update the data, and then re-enable your compression policy (which will handle re-compression 
of your modified chunks). Based on the manual process required for adding out of 
order data we encourage you to consider this as you set your compression policy. 
However, we are also planning to address this (ability to modify compressed chunks) 
in a future release.

> Out of order data and compression 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Out of order data and compression 
```

Reviewer 2: Add anchor

> # Compression Operational Guide

Author: done

> >:WARNING:Compression is disabled when using Timescale in conjuction with postgres 

Reviewer 2: `10.7` I believe

> >:WARNING:Compression is disabled when using Timescale in conjuction with postgres 

Author: its 10.2 @cevian pointed out will fix

> >:WARNING:Compression is disabled when using Timescale in conjuction with postgres 

Author: fixed

9.6 in oeder to use compression you must be using postgres 10 or 11 or higher.

As of version 1.5,TimescaleDB supports the ability to natively compress data. This 
function does not require the use of any specific file system or external software, 
and as you will see in the coming paragraphs, is simple to set up and customizable 

> by the user. 

Author: done

> Prior to reading this guide, we recommend taking a look at our architecture section 

Author: done

to learn more about how compression works. At a high level, TimescaleDB’s built-in 
job scheduler framework will asynchronously convert recent data from an uncompressed 
row-based form to a compressed columnar form across chunks of TimescaleDB hypertables. 

> Once a chunk is old enough, the chunk will be transactionally converted from the 

Author: done

row to columnar form. 

This section will walk through the concepts and help you understand some of the 
benefits and limitations of native compression. We will also walk you through the 
basics of setting this up for use in your environment. 

>:TIP: As with any type of data altering operation, we would suggest backing up 
your important data prior to implementing compression.

You can compress data as it comes into TimescaleDB in one of two ways:

> Policy-based compression: Set up automatic compression of data once it has reached 

Author: done

a certain age.

Manually compress chunks: Use explicit commands that will compress chunks that you 
specify.

Before we start, we will give you a high-level overview of how compression works 
using an example that has been implemented based on policy. 

With regards to compression, a chunk can be in one of three states: active (uncompressed), 
compression candidate (uncompressed), compressed. Active chunks are those that are 
currently ingesting data. Due to the nature of the compression mechanism, they cannot 
effectively ingest data while compressed.

![alt text](https://assets.timescale.com/images/diagrams/compression_diagram.png "compress")

> In this case, the data in Position 0 (which is our active chunk) will always be 

Author: done

> uncompressed, and the current active chunk will not be a candidate for compression 

Author: done

in order to protect the system’s ability to perform high volume/high velocity ingestion. 
Once data moves out of Position 0 (the active chunk) and into something greater 

> than or equal to Position 1, which is now considered historical data, it then becomes 

Author: done

a compression candidate (it can now be compressed manually or via policy).  

In this example we have chosen NOT to compress the chunk in position 1, however 

> all full chunks (position 1-4) are candidates for compression. As you can see in 

Author: done

this example we have chosen to wait until a chunk reaches Position 2 (in this case 
the chunk is 3 days old) before we decide to apply compression,meaning chunks 3 days 
and older will be compressed.

> ### Preparing Hypertable for Compression [](prepare)

Reviewer 2: More descriptive anchor names (this is really important to set properly now, since links that will go out into the wild will use these anchors, so we don't want to change unless absolutely necessary)

Reviewer 2: Throughout the doc

Now that we have covered a visual demonstration of how compression works and some 
of the things you need to be aware of when planning, let’s cover how your hypertable 
will organize data for compression.

The first thing we need to do when setting up your hypertable for compression is 
decide how we are going to organize the data to achieve the best overall compression. 
In general there are two ways to consider how your data will be organized during 

> the compression process: order by and segment by. TimescaleDB provides these options 

Author: done

which are implemented by using `ALTER TABLE`. The following will explain the differences, 
and when to use each option. 

Order By

The main option that needs to be set is timescaledb.compress_orderby. You can think 
of this option as the ORDER BY clause in a SQL query, but in this case used on your 

> raw data when it is sent to the compression process. This option uses a data column 

Author: done

as an argument. Additionally, this option is important because it directly impacts 
the compression rates as you’ll see. 

Compression is most effective when related data is close in magnitude or exhibits 
some sort of trend. In other words, random or out of order data will compress poorly. 
When choosing the column list to pass to the compress_orderby function, you want 
to choose columns that will result in the rest of the columns being ordered in a 

> way that is compressible. 

Author: done

Let’s walk through an example. Assume you have a table defined by: 

``` sql
CREATE TABLE metrics
(
     time TIMESTAMPTZ,
     device_id INT,
     value float
);

SELECT create_hypertable('metrics', 'time');
```

Let’s further assume that you have 2 devices. Device 1 measures temperature and 

> humidity, while device 2 measures the air quality index. Your table might look 

Author: removed

In this case, your statement for turning on compression for this hypertable would 
look like this:

``` sql
ALTER TABLE metrics SET (timescaledb.compress, "timescaledb.compress_orderby = 'device_id, time');
```

Segment By

As discussed earlier, timescaledb.compress_orderby defines how your compressed data 
is ordered. When only compress_orderby is specified, all columns are compressed into 
arrays that contain a maximum of 1000 values. So, in the example where we order by 
`device_id, time`, the table would now become three columns that get compressed, 
as shown below:

|device_id|time|value|
|---|---|---|
|1|8/22/2019 0:00|88.2|
|1|8/22/2019 1:00|88.6|
|1|8/22/2019 2:00|90.0|
|2|8/22/2019 0:05|300.5|
|2|8/22/2019 1:05|302.0|
|2|8/22/2019 2:05|301.0|

However, what happens when you want to query by device_id? You’ll end up having 
to decompress the above chunk in order to find values associated with device_id = 2, 
since the values for device 1 and device 2 are grouped together in the same segment. 
That means that you can’t actually build a b-tree index on device_id. To get around 
this, you can use/apply an additional option to segment the compressed data: 

> timescaledb.compress_segmentby(column list)

Author: fixed

``` sql
ALTER TABLE metrics SET (timescaledb.compress, timescaledb.compress_orderby = 'time', 
timescaledb.compress_segmentby = 'device_id');
```

Using timescaledb.compress_segmentby essentially takes the columns you pass into 
it and ensures that each compressed array has 1 copy of that value. It is saved 
in uncompressed format, and so it can be used in a b-tree index. 

So now your compressed data will look more like the following, which is divided 
into two segments (by device_id). We can now index the device_id directly.

|device_id|time|value|
|---|---|---|

> |1|8/22/2019 0:00|88.2|

Author: fixed

||8/22/2019 1:00|88.6|
||8/22/2019 2:00|90.0|

>:TIP: We do not recommend using segmentby if you expect less than 100 values per 
device id (as an example). This is because you won’t get the nice compression characteristics 
anymore if you don’t have very many values per device_id. For example, if device 2 

> only ever reports 5 data points, that compressed array will only contain 5 data points. 

Author: Need to discuss with @cevian  will defer to post release

You still need to specify a column for timescaledb.compress_orderby. Let’s take 

> a look at device 1. You notice that the values are increasing with time. If you 

Author: fixed

> don’t order by time, you have no guarantee that the values will not be non-random, 

Author: fixed

which will hurt your compression rates. Here we are passing in BOTH and order by 

> and segment by arguments to achieve the results described above.

Author: fixed

This part of the process simply prepares your hyper table for compression, and tell 
TimescaleDB how you would like your compressed data organized. (Note that we have 
not started the compression process yet, that will come in the next step.)

---

### Manual vs. Policy-Based Compression [](compress)

Now that we understand a little about how compression works and how we plan to 
organize our data to maximize compression efficiency, we will start the process 
of actually compressing our data. This process can be approached one of two ways.

> Manual Compression

Author: done

The first option we will review is the ability to manually compress chunks. Here 
you are going to issue commands that will specify chunks you would like to compress.

We start by getting a list of the chunks we want to compress. In this case our hypertable 
is called conditions, and we are looking for the chunks associated with this hypertable 
with data older than three days.

``` sql
SELECT show_chunks('conditions', older_than => interval '3 days'); 
```

||show_chunks|
|---|---|---|
|1|_timescaledb_internal_hyper_1_2_chunk|
|2|_timescaledb_internal_hyper_1_3_chunk|

> From here we can begin the process of compressing each of listed chunks with the 

Author: fixed

following command:

``` sql
select compress_chunk( '_timescaledb_internal._hyper_1_2_chunk');
```
You can see the results of the compression of that given chunk by running the following:

``` sql
select * from _timescaledb_catalog.compression_chunk_size
order by chunk_id;
```
This will return a result set that will show you the compressed chunks and the 

> stats about those chunks. In the case of a single chunk the results look like this:

Author: fixed no need they will see when they run the command

We could then proceed to compress all of the chunks in this example that are more 
than three days old by simply repeating the process for the remaining chunks in 
the list we generated.

Policy Based Compression:

We have covered the concept of manually going in and identifying what chunks you 
would like to see compressed, next we will cover automating this process with policy 

> based compression.  

Author: fixed

With policy based compression, we can tell TimescaleDB to set a policy that will 
compress chunks of data when they reach a given age. As we covered in an earlier 
section, a chunk becomes eligible for compression as soon as it is no longer the 
“active” chunk, that is it has moved from position zero to position one (in our 

> diagram above). When this happens is determined by when you create the hypertable 

Author: done

``` sql
select add_compress_chunks_policy('conditions', '60d'::interval);
```

This will create a policy that will ensure all chunks older than 60 days will be 
compressed.  Please note this still requires that we set up the hypertable for compression 
and that you have issued the commands to ensure that TimescaleDB understands how 
to organize your data. This command simply automates the process of compressing 
those chunks that cross the 60 day age threshold.

To confirm that your policy job has been created, you can validate it by using 
the following command:

``` sql
select * from _timescaledb_config.bgw_job where job_type like 'compress%';
```

Notice the system will look for chunks that cross the 60 day threshold every 15 
minutes and if the job for some reason fails it will be put in the retry queue 
and be retried in an hour.
---

### Decompressing Chunks [](decompress)

Next we want to walk through what needs to happen in the event that you need to 
backfill or update data that lives in a compressed chunk. 

TimescaleDB does not support inserts orupdates into a compressed chunk. To insert 
or update data, we must first decompress the target chunks. But before we can do 

> that, we need to turn off our compression policy, otherwisethat policy will attempt 

Author: done

to re-compress the chunks that we are currently working on (not the desired result). 
To accomplish this we will issue the following command:

``` sql
select remove_compress_chunks_policy('conditions');
```

We have now removed the compress chunk policy from the hypertable conditions which 

> will leave us free to decompressing the chunks we need to modify via backfill or 

Author: done

update. To decompress the chunk(s) that we will be modifying, for each chunk:

``` sql
select decompress_chunk( '_timescaledb_internal._hyper_2_2_chunk'); 
```

> >:TIP: You would want to run this command for each chunk that would be impacted 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>:TIP: You need to run the `decompress_chunk` command for each chunk that would be impacted 
```

Author: done

by your INSERT or UPDATE statement in backfilling data. Once your needed chunks 
are decompressed you can proceed with your data backfill operations.

Once your backfill and update operations are complete we can simply re-enable our compression policy job:

``` sql
select add_compress_chunks_policy('cpu', '60d'::interval);
```
This job will run and re-compress any chunks that you may have decompressed during your backfill operation.

---

### Best Practices [](best)
Considerations around Compression Policy:

When setting our compression policy and the timing around when to compress a 
chunk you should consider the types of queries that that you are running. Our 
experience has shown that when data is young (positions 0-2 in our use case) 
we tend to query the data in a more shallow and wide manner. 

> As an example, show me current CPU usage, disc usage, energy consumption, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an example, "show me current CPU usage, disc usage, energy consumption, 
```

Reviewer: 'disc'=>'disk'

Author: done

> and I/O for server X. In this case the row based format that is native to PostgreSQL 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and I/O for server X". In this case the row based format that is native to PostgreSQL 
```

> will serve us well from a performance perspective. As data begins to age and our 

Reviewer 2: This second half of the paragraph is confusing grammatically.

> queries being to become more analytical in nature (deep and narrow queries) as an 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
queries begin to become more analytical in nature (deep and narrow queries) as an 
```

example we might want to calculate the average number of logins across all users. 
In this case, the columnar nature of the query (performing a function on the number 
of logins) will lend itself to better performance.  

The process of compression as we have implemented it involves converting row based 
data into more of a columnar format to achieve better overall data consolidation.  
In the long term this is one part of how you want to think about your compression 
policy strategy (i.e. at what point do you start to use deep and narrow queries) 
along with things like frequency of access and disk savings to decide when to start 

> compressing checks.

Reviewer 2: > compressing checks

Not sure what this means?

>:WARNING: The current release of TimescaleDB supports the ability to query data in 
compressed chunks, however, it does not support inserts, or updates into compressed 

> chunks.  The next several sections will discuss ways to deal with that limitation.  

Reviewer 2: > The next several sections...

Should not be in a warning.  Warnings should be standalone.  If you want to refer to other sections, move this into normal text.

Reviewer 2: Or just remove the last sentence

Author: done
